COUNTRY: South Sudan
PERIOD: Nov 2012 / Mar 2013
========================================

The current acute IPCoutlook for South Sudan showed improved food insecurity situation compared to the same quarter last year. Average to above average rains and good harvest in the first season in the bimodal rainfall zone have contributed to this improvement.
Greater Equatoria
The three states of greater Equatoria that include Western, Central and Eastern Equatoria are in Minimal or none food insecurity phase 1. However, Kapoeta East County is at Stress levels of food insecurity (IPC phase 2). According to IPC version 2 phases definition, households are characterized to be at phase 1, when at least four in five households in a given area are able to meet essential food and non food needs without engaging in a typical coping strategy including any reliance on humanitarian assistance
Greater Bahr el Ghazal
Exception Warrap, Lakes and northern and eastern parts of Northern Bahr el Ghazal states, the rest of the region is at Stress levels food insecurity.  Persistent insecurity, high food price and above average seasonal flooding coupled with chronic food insecurity are underlying factors affecting food security in the region. The region has also received high number of returnees and IDPs from neighboring area of Abyei.  Livelihood activities were disrupted in Timsah payam of Western Bahr el Ghazal, Aweil east and Aweil north of Northern Bahr el Ghazal State due border conflict between Sudan and South Sudan. As the result, these areas are currently at Stress levels of food insecurity (IPC phase 2) and  rest of the states mainly mainly Aweil Center and Aweil West,  parts of Warap and Wulu and  Rumbek Centre counties of  Lakes state are facing none or minimal levels of food insecurity (IPC phase 1). 
Greater Upper Nile
The  Leer,  Rubkona and Pariang  counties  of Unity  state  are currently at minimal  levels  of food  insecurity due  to available  harvest and market  linkages. However, areas  like Mayom, Mayendit, Panyijar and Abiemnhom are at Stress levels of  food insecurity due  to persistent insecurity and above average  flooding which submerged most  farms. In Jonglei,  the populations in Pochalla, Boma and Western Akobo along Pibor River are at minimal levels of  food insecurity (IPC phase 1), Counties like Uror, Ayod, Nyirol and Akobo  west  at  experiencing  Stress  levels  of  food  insecurity  (IPC phase  2)  due  to  previous  insecurity,  historical  bad  harvest  (2011)  and  unusual  localize  flooding.  However, Leukongole, Gumuruk and Vertieth payams of Pibor County are at crises level (IPC phase 3).
Key findings for projected period of November 2012 - March 2013
Greater Equatoria
The projected acute food insecurity situation in Greater Equatoria showed mixed trend. Four counties in Western Equatoria that include Ezo, Nzara,Mvolo and Mundri East are expected to slip Stress level of food insecurity (IPC phase 2) due late rains which inundated farms and expected to reduce crop yields of the second cropping season and market supply. Mongalla, Terkeka and Lainya Counties of Central Equatoria witnessed dry spell affecting first harvest and pointing toward low yields for second crop. As the result, these areas together with Kapeota east are likely to be at Stress level of food insecurity (IPC phase 2) in second phase of scenario (January to February 2013).
Greater Bahr el Ghazal
In Greater Bahr el Ghazal, Aweil North and Aweil East and Aweil South of Northern Bahr el Ghazal;, Awerial, Yirol East, Rumbek North and Cuiebet of Lakes; Twic in Warrap and Timsah payam of Western Bahr el Ghazal states are likely be at Crises levels of food insecurity (IPC phase 3) could the insecurity at the borders escalate. Insecurity along the border with Sudan, cattle raiding (inter/intra-communal conflict) and high number of IDPs and returnees received were the driving factors for food insecurity. While 2/3 of this region is at stress levels food insecurity, some pockets are expected to be at none or minimal levels food insecurity (see current map and summary)
Greater Upper Nile
Resumption of cross border trade and oil production is expected to increase market supply and labor opportunity. As the result, Rubkona, Guit, Koch, Mayendit and Leer Counties of Unity are expected to be at none or minimal food insecurity (IPC phase 1). The rest of the counties of are expected to be at Stress levels of food insecurity (IPC phase 2) due to insecurity and poor road networks and above average flooding observed during cropping season. Pariang County could have been in a worse phase without continuous humanitarian assistance. The productive counties of Upper Nile mainly Renk, Manyo, Fashoda, and Malakal are at none or minimal levels food insecurity (IPC phase1). The rest of the counties in the state are expected to be at Stress levels of food insecurity (IPC phase 2). In Jonglei, Pochalla and Boma are expected to remain in minimal level of food insecurity (IPC phase 1); however, Leukongole, Gumuruk and Vertieth are likely to be at emergency phase (IPC phase 4) due to ongoing insecurity coupled prevalent of Kalazar outbreak and cattle rustling. The rest of the counties in Jonglei are expected to be at Crises levels (IPC phase 3) due to poor roads leading to market failure and potential increase of cattle rustling during dry season.