COUNTRY: Sudan
PERIOD: Apr 2017 / Sep 2017
========================================

A total of 157 localities in Sudan were classified for the period of the update. Two states were not classified due to lack of information (Gedaref and East Darfur) besides 4 Localities were not classified due to lack of information. 
56 Localities were classified to be at IPC phase 1; 
77 localities classified at IPC phase 2;
24 localities in IPC phase 3, (2 more localities compared to 22 localities in the previous update)
Rainfall during the 2016 summer cropping season was generally very favorable in most parts of Sudan in terms of both amounts and distribution, As a result this year’s high national production of almost eight million MT of cereals was produced. 
The combination of high yields and increased harvestable area was estimated to result in the production of 5.86 million MT of sorghum and 1.48 million MT of millet. These figures exceeded the previous season drought-affected production and the average production of the previous five years by 146 and 68 percent respectively in the case of sorghum production, and by 187 and 93 percent respectively in the case of millet production which are considered as main stable food crops, Wheat harvested by March/April 2017 is generally good, with an estimated production of 483 000 MT. Food is also available in the markets. Good rainfall has resulted in good pastures and well-replenished water sources (hafirs), and livestock vaccination programmes have been effective. Therefore, livestock body condition is generally good. However some areas in South Kordofan, North Darfur Kassala and Red Sea states have been affected by rain shortage and long dry spells which resulted in localized food deficit.
Main staple food prices have seasonally declined during harvest period of January to February in most markets due to this year’s good production. During March, prices either remained stable or slightly increased, as prices increased about 10 to 15 percent in some markets. However, current level of cereal prices remained on average 10 percent above last year and over 45 percent above the recent five-year average due to high cost of production Above average cash crops(Groundnut, sesame and sunflower)production reported in most areas this season, this resulted in improved income and hence household’s access to food from market has improved. 
Livestock prices either stabilized or continued to increase slightly in most market during March and April 2017, this has slightly improved household’s income from animal sales.
Influx of Refugees from South Sudan into neighboring states of Sudan has increased, due to persistent conflict and severe acute food insecurity situation. It is estimated that around 47,800 refugees arrived in March 2017, bringing the total number of arrivals since the beginning of 2017 to nearly 85,000. This likely has likely increase the demand for local consumption and contribute price increases. 
The potential of commercial fishing of the Red Sea State coast is estimated at about 10 000 tonnes per year, besides the Nile fish and the abundant horticultural production are enhancing the income and diversity in food.
  The main hazards in most areas during this period are:
The soaring of non-cereal food prices which affects poor household’s food consumption and dietary diversity.
Another specific hazard is the drought affected areas of Western part of South. Kordofan, the Northern parts of North Darfur and some parts of Red Sea and Kassala states showed a rapid increase of cereal and non-cereal food item prices due to low production and high cost of transportation. This expected to reduce poor household’s access to food from market.
The number of new arrivals of South Sudanese refugees is expected to increase rapidly during coming months, around 180,000 new arrivals from South Sudan may arrive by the end of 2017. This will increase number of people in need of food in Sudan
The increasing supplies of the locally produced wheat tended to stabilize in a number of monitored markets. However some markets were still showing an increasing trend as the harvest has just started in March.
Still poor cultural practices exist which affect the diet diversity and cause high rates in malnutrition (phase 3).
Drinking water scarcity was reported in some areas of eastern and western parts in term of quantity and quality.